Split SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE into SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE and SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS (#1542)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

## Subscribing to Namespaces

If the subscriber is aware of a namespace of interest, it can send
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS to publishers/relays it has established
a session with.

SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests namespace discovery: the publisher sends relevant
NAMESPACE and NAMESPACE_DONE messages for namespaces matching the prefix,
including echoing back Track Namespaces under the prefix that have been published
to it.

SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS requests track subscriptions: the publisher sends PUBLISH
messages for tracks within matching namespaces, including echoing back published
Tracks under the prefix to the subscriber. If an endpoint accepts its own PUBLISH,
this behaves as self-subscription described in {{subscriptions}}.

Either message with zero Track Namespace fields indicates the sender is
interested in all namespaces or all tracks from the receiver, respectively.

The subscriber sends SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS on a new
bidirectional stream and the publisher MUST send a single REQUEST_OK or
REQUEST_ERROR as the first message on the bidirectional stream in response.

> If a Subscription cannot be created because there is no available Request ID,

Author: ```suggestion
If a Subscription cannot be created because there are no available bidirectional streams,
```

the Publisher sends a PUBLISH_BLOCKED message on the SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS response
stream to indicate the Full Track Name of the Subscription that could not be
established. The Publisher MUST NOT send a PUBLISH for a Track after
PUBLISH_BLOCKED has been sent.  The subscriber can instead issue a SUBSCRIBE
to establish a subscription to that track.

The receiver of a REQUEST_OK or REQUEST_ERROR ought to
forward the result to the application, so the application can decide which other
publishers to contact, if any.

> A SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS can be cancelled by closing the
> stream with either a FIN or RESET_STREAM. Cancelling does not prohibit original publishers
> from sending further PUBLISH_NAMESPACE or PUBLISH messages, but relays MUST NOT
> send any further PUBLISH messages to a client without knowing the client is
> interested in and authorized to receive the content.

Author: ```suggestion
A SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS can be cancelled by closing the
stream with either a FIN or RESET_STREAM. Cancelling SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS does not prohibit original publishers
from sending further PUBLISH messages, but relays MUST NOT
send any further PUBLISH messages to a client without knowing the client is
interested in and authorized to receive the content.
```

If a publisher is authoritative for a given namespace, or is a relay that has
received an authorized PUBLISH_NAMESPACE for that namespace from an upstream

> publisher, it MUST send a PUBLISH_NAMESPACE to any subscriber that has

Author: ```suggestion
publisher, it MUST send a NAMESPACE message to any subscriber that has
```

## Subscribing to Namespaces

If the subscriber is aware of a namespace of interest, it can send
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS to publishers/relays it has established
a session with.

> SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE requests namespace discovery: the publisher sends relevant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACES requests namespace discovery: the publisher sends relevant
```

Author: 🤷 I can spend 45 seconds asking in the interim

NAMESPACE and NAMESPACE_DONE messages for namespaces matching the prefix,
including echoing back Track Namespaces under the prefix that have been published
to it.

SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS requests track subscriptions: the publisher sends PUBLISH
messages for tracks within matching namespaces, including echoing back published
Tracks under the prefix to the subscriber. If an endpoint accepts its own PUBLISH,

> this behaves as self-subscription described in {{subscriptions}}.

Reviewer: I think we don't allow for the tracks to be echoed by default (sub-ns with self track commit)

Author: It was removed in #1596, I updated here to match

> this behaves as self-subscription described in {{subscriptions}}.

Author: ```suggestion
messages for tracks within matching namespaces, excluding tracks published
by the subscriber.
```

Either message with zero Track Namespace fields indicates the sender is
interested in all namespaces or all tracks from the receiver, respectively.

The subscriber sends SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS on a new
bidirectional stream and the publisher MUST send a single REQUEST_OK or

> REQUEST_ERROR as the first message on the bidirectional stream in response.

Reviewer: should we also add a note to say the namespace, namespace done, publish, publish done messages all get sent on the same bidirectional stream estabalisining the request ?

Author: I think this whole paragraph is out of place.  The mechanics like that are covered in the message section.

|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x1D   | PUBLISH ({{message-publish}})                  | Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x1E   | PUBLISH_OK ({{message-publish-ok}})            | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0xB    | PUBLISH_DONE ({{message-publish-done}})        | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x16   | FETCH ({{message-fetch}})                      | Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x18   | FETCH_OK ({{message-fetch-ok}})                | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0xD    | TRACK_STATUS ({{message-track-status}})        | Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x6    | PUBLISH_NAMESPACE ({{message-pub-ns}})         | Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|

> | 0x50   | SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE ({{message-subscribe-ns}}) | Request, First |

Author: I changed it on purpose since the functionality was different.

| 0x50   | SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE ({{message-subscribe-ns}}) | Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x51   | SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS ({{message-subscribe-tracks}})| Request, First |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x8    | NAMESPACE ({{message-namespace}})              | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0xE    | NAMESPACE_DONE ({{message-namespace-done}})    | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0xF    | PUBLISH_BLOCKED ({{message-publish-blocked}})  | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x2    | REQUEST_UPDATE ({{message-request-update}})    | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x7    | REQUEST_OK ({{message-request-ok}})            | Request        |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| 0x5    | REQUEST_ERROR ({{message-request-error}})      | Request        |

> |--------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|

Reviewer: may be you need to add one line that says what does "First" mean here ?

Author: @suhasHere seem immediately above the table  

> Messages marked "First" MUST be the first message on a new request stream.

After sending a NEW_GROUP_REQUEST upstream, the request is considered
outstanding until the Largest Group increases.

### TRACK_NAMESPACE_PREFIX Parameter {#track-namespace-prefix-param}

The TRACK_NAMESPACE_PREFIX parameter (Parameter Type 0x34) uses the Track
Namespace encoding described in {{track-name}}.  It MAY appear in REQUEST_UPDATE
for a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS request.  It updates the Track

> Namespace Prefix for that subscription.  If the new prefix would overlap with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespace Prefix for that subscription.  If the new prefix would share a common prefix with
```

fails for a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or PUBLISH_NAMESPACE, the responder MUST close
the bidi stream.

### Updating Namespace Subscriptions

A subscriber can update the Track Namespace Prefix of an established
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS by including the
TRACK_NAMESPACE_PREFIX parameter ({{track-namespace-prefix-param}}) in a
REQUEST_UPDATE.  The overlap restriction applies independently per type: the
new prefix MUST NOT share a common prefix with any other active
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE (for a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE update) or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS
(for a SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS update) in the same session.  If the update is
accepted, the publisher adjusts which NAMESPACE, NAMESPACE_DONE, or PUBLISH
messages it sends to reflect the new prefix.  Messages sent before the

> REQUEST_OK do not reflect the new prefix.

Author: ```suggestion
(for a SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS update) in the same session.  If the update is
accepted, NAMESPACE and NAMESPACE_DONE messages following the
REQUEST_OK will contain Track Namespace suffixes relative to the
updated prefix.  Updating the prefix of a SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS has
no effect on existing subscriptions.  If the subscriber is no longer
interested it can cancel the corresponding bidirectional stream.
```

Errors below can only be used in response to one message type.

PREFIX_OVERLAP:
: In response to SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS, the namespace prefix

> overlaps with another subscription of the same type in the same session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shares a common prefix with another subscription of the same type in the same session.
```

sent and the sender of the REQUEST_UPDATEs will not always be
able to determine which caused an error.

### Updating Namespace Subscriptions

A subscriber can update the Track Namespace Prefix of an established
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS by including the
TRACK_NAMESPACE_PREFIX parameter ({{track-namespace-prefix-param}}) in a
REQUEST_UPDATE.  The overlap restriction applies independently per type: the
new prefix MUST NOT share a common prefix with any other active

> SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE (for a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE update) or SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS

Reviewer: clarifying question:
if i do a sub-ns to a/b
and then do req_update to a/b/c ( more focussed namespace), is it an error ?

Author: It is not an error.  It is only an error if the new namespace overlaps with a different sub_ns

Author: Claude thinks the text is fine:

> you could add a brief clarifying clause like "excluding the subscription being updated" after "any other active SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE" to make it explicit. But I'd lean toward leaving it as-is since "any other" already implies the distinction.

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{message-params}}.

The publisher will respond with REQUEST_OK or REQUEST_ERROR on the response half
of the stream. If the subscriber receives any frame other than a REQUEST_OK or a
REQUEST_ERROR as the first frame on the response half of the stream, then it
MUST close the session with a PROTOCOL_VIOLATION. If the SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE is
successful, the publisher will send matching NAMESPACE messages on the response
stream. If it is an error, the stream will be immediately closed via FIN. When
there are changes to the namespaces being published and the subscriber is
subscribed to them, the publisher sends the corresponding NAMESPACE or
NAMESPACE_DONE messages.

Within a session, if a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with a
Track Namespace Prefix that shares a common prefix with an established
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, it MUST respond with REQUEST_ERROR with error code
`PREFIX_OVERLAP`.  SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE and SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS have independent
overlap spaces (see {{message-subscribe-tracks}}).

The publisher MUST ensure the subscriber is authorized to perform this
namespace subscription.

> SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE is not required for a publisher to send PUBLISH_NAMESPACE

Author: ```suggestion
```

messages to a subscriber.  It is useful in applications or relays where
subscribers are only interested in or authorized to access a subset of
available namespaces.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

  Namespace Fields, it MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{message-params}}.

The publisher will respond with REQUEST_OK or REQUEST_ERROR on the response half
of the stream. If the subscriber receives any frame other than a REQUEST_OK or a
REQUEST_ERROR as the first frame on the response half of the stream, then it
MUST close the session with a PROTOCOL_VIOLATION. If the SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS is
successful, the publisher will send PUBLISH messages on new bidirectional streams
for tracks within matching namespaces. If it is an error, the stream will be
closed via FIN after REQUEST_ERROR is sent.

Within a session, if a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS with a
Track Namespace Prefix that shares a common prefix with an established
SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS, it MUST respond with REQUEST_ERROR with error code
`PREFIX_OVERLAP`.  SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS and SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE have independent
overlap spaces (see {{message-subscribe-ns}}).

The publisher MUST ensure the subscriber is authorized to perform this
namespace subscription.

SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS is not required for a publisher to send PUBLISH messages to

> a subscriber.  It is useful in applications or relays where subscribers are

Author: ```suggestion
a subscriber.  It is useful for subscribers are
```

  Track Namespace Prefix (..),
  Number of Parameters (vi64),
  Parameters (..) ...
}
~~~
{: #moq-transport-subscribe-tracks-format title="MOQT SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS Message"}

* Request ID: See {{request-id}}.

* Required Request ID Delta: See {{required-request-id}}.

* Track Namespace Prefix: A Track Namespace structure as described in
  {{track-name}} with between 0 and 32 Track Namespace Fields.  This prefix is
  matched against track namespaces known to the publisher.  If an endpoint
  receives a Track Namespace Prefix consisting of greater than 32 Track
  Namespace Fields, it MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{message-params}}.

The publisher will respond with REQUEST_OK or REQUEST_ERROR on the response half
of the stream. If the subscriber receives any frame other than a REQUEST_OK or a
REQUEST_ERROR as the first frame on the response half of the stream, then it
MUST close the session with a PROTOCOL_VIOLATION. If the SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS is
successful, the publisher will send PUBLISH messages on new bidirectional streams
for tracks within matching namespaces. If it is an error, the stream will be

> immediately closed via FIN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
closed via FIN after REQUEST_ERROR is sent.
```

I realize this text happens elsewhere, but I think this is a bit clearer?  I can do it as a separate PR if that's better.  The text about REQUEST_OK and REQUEST_ERROR is repeated a lot.

Within a session, if a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS with a
Track Namespace Prefix that shares a common prefix with an established
SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS, it MUST respond with REQUEST_ERROR with error code
`PREFIX_OVERLAP`.  SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS and SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE have independent
overlap spaces (see {{message-subscribe-ns}}).

The publisher MUST ensure the subscriber is authorized to perform this
namespace subscription.

> SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS is not required for a publisher to send PUBLISH messages to

Author: It was there before and now appears in both sections, but needs some updates.

session. Within a session, if a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with a
Track Namespace Prefix that shares a common prefix with an established namespace
subscription, it MUST respond with REQUEST_ERROR with error code
`PREFIX_OVERLAP`.
stream. If it is an error, the stream will be immediately closed via FIN. When
there are changes to the namespaces being published and the subscriber is
subscribed to them, the publisher sends the corresponding NAMESPACE or
NAMESPACE_DONE messages.

Within a session, if a publisher receives a SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE with a
Track Namespace Prefix that shares a common prefix with an established
SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE, it MUST respond with REQUEST_ERROR with error code
`PREFIX_OVERLAP`.  SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE and SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS have independent
overlap spaces (see {{message-subscribe-tracks}}).

The publisher MUST ensure the subscriber is authorized to perform this
namespace subscription.

SUBSCRIBE_NAMESPACE is not required for a publisher to send PUBLISH_NAMESPACE
or PUBLISH messages to a subscriber.  It is useful in applications or relays
where subscribers are only interested in or authorized to access a subset of

> available namespaces and tracks.

Reviewer: why did we remove this ? I think this still holds true right ?

Author: I think @ianswett wanted to remove it. It's not normative, and I think he felt like it wasn't adding that much value.
